                 Module 3 – Frontend – CSS and CSS3 
 
                        CSS Selectors & Styling
Theory Assignment:

Question 1: What is a CSS selector? Provide examples of element, class, and ID selectors.
ANS: A CSS selector is the part of a CSS rule that tells the browser which HTML elements to style.
It “selects” the elements in your HTML document so you can apply specific styles to them.
1] Element Selector

Targets HTML elements by their tag name.

p {
  color: blue;
}

2] Class Selector

Targets elements with a specific class attribute.

Always starts with a dot (.).

.highlight {
  background-color: yellow;
}

3]ID Selector

Targets a unique element with a specific ID.

Always starts with a hash (#).

#mainTitle {
  font-size: 24px;
  font-weight: bold;
}

Question 2: Explain the concept of CSS specificity. How do conflicts between multiple stylesget
resolved?
ANS:CSS Specificity

Specificity is a set of rules CSS uses to determine which style to apply when multiple CSS rules target the same element.

Think of it like a “priority system.”
When there are conflicting styles, the browser decides which one wins based on specificity score.

*How Conflicts Are Resolved

Browser first checks specificity (higher wins).

If specificity is equal, the later rule in the CSS file wins (last one written overrides).

If !important is used, that rule wins — unless another rule with !important and higher specificity exists.


Question 3: What is the difference between internal, external, and inline CSS? Discuss the
advantages and disadvantages of each approach.
ANS: 1. Inline CSS

CSS written directly inside an HTML element using the style attribute.

<p style="color: blue; font-size: 18px;">This is inline CSS</p>


✅ Advantages

Quick and easy to apply for a single element.

Useful for testing or overriding styles fast.

❌ Disadvantages

Makes HTML code messy and hard to maintain.

Styles cannot be reused.

2. Internal CSS

CSS written inside a <style> tag in the head section of an HTML file.

<head>
  <style>
    p {
      color: green;
    }
  </style>
</head>
<body>
  <p>This is internal CSS</p>
</body>


✅ Advantages

Keeps styles in one place for a single page.

Easier to manage than inline CSS.

Can target multiple elements within the same page.

❌ Disadvantages

Styles apply only to one HTML page.

If you have many pages, you’d need to copy the CSS to each one (not efficient).

3. External CSS

CSS written in a separate .css file, then linked to the HTML using <link>.

<!-- HTML file -->
<head>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css">
</head>

<!-- styles.css -->
p {
  color: red;
  font-size: 18px;
}


✅ Advantages

Best for large projects (can apply the same CSS to multiple pages).

Clean and organized: HTML and CSS are kept separate.

CSS file is cached by the browser → faster loading on multiple pages.

❌ Disadvantages

Requires an extra HTTP request (loading the CSS file).

If the external file is missing or not loaded, the page loses styling.

                                CSS Box Model


Question 1: Explain the CSS box model and its components (content, padding, border,
margin). How does each affect the size of an element?
ANS: CSS Box Model

The CSS box model describes how every HTML element is treated as a rectangular box.
It defines the layout and spacing of elements on a webpage.

Each element is made up of four main components (from inside out):

1. Content

The actual text, image, or other content inside the element.

Its size is controlled by properties like width, height, font-size, etc.

2. Padding

The space between the content and the border.

Increases the clickable/visible area inside the element without affecting outside spacing.

3. Border

A line surrounding the padding and content.

You can control its width, style, and color.

4. Margin

The space outside the border, creating distance between this element and others.

Effect on Element Size

By default (box-sizing: content-box):
Total Element Width = Content + Padding + Border + Margin
Total Element Height = Content + Padding + Border + Margin

Question 2: What is the difference between border-box and content-box box-sizing inCSS?
Which is the default?
ANS:
box-sizing in CSS

The box-sizing property tells the browser how to calculate the total size of an element (width and height).

There are two main values:

1. content-box (Default)

Width & height apply only to the content area.

Padding and border are added outside the defined width/height.

2. border-box

Width & height include content + padding + border.

The element will not grow bigger when padding or border is added.


                                                         CSS Flexbox



Theory Assignment

Question 1: What is CSS Flexbox, and how is it useful for layout design? Explain the terms
flex-container and flex-item.
ANS:
Definition: CSS Flexbox is a layout model that makes it easier to design responsive and flexible layouts.

Instead of using float, table, or positioning tricks, Flexbox allows elements to adjust and distribute space automatically within a container.

It is mainly used for arranging items in rows or columns, and it can handle alignment, spacing, and distribution of elements very effectively.
1. Flex-Container

The parent element where display: flex; is applied.

It controls how its child elements (flex-items) behave.
2. Flex-Item

The direct child elements inside a flex-container.

These items flex (grow, shrink, or stay fixed) according to the container’s rules.

Question 2: Describe the properties justify-content, align-items, and flexdirection used in Flexbox.
ANS:
1. justify-content

👉 Controls horizontal alignment of flex-items inside the flex-container (main axis).

Values:

flex-start → Items start from the left (default).

flex-end → Items move to the right.

center → Items are centered horizontally.

space-between → Equal space between items, edges touch container.

space-around → Equal space around items (half-space at edges).

space-evenly → Equal space between and outside items.
2. align-items

👉 Controls vertical alignment of flex-items (cross axis).

Values:

stretch → Items stretch to fill the container’s height (default).

flex-start → Items align at the top.

flex-end → Items align at the bottom.

center → Items align in the vertical center.

baseline → Items align based on their text baseline.
3. flex-direction

👉 Defines the direction of the main axis (row or column).

Values:

row → Items go left to right (default).

row-reverse → Items go right to left.

column → Items go top to bottom.

column-reverse → Items go bottom to top.


                                       CSS Grid


Theory Assignment

Question 1: Explain CSS Grid and how it differs from Flexbox. When would you use Grid over
Flexbox?
ANS:
CSS Grid

Definition: CSS Grid is a 2D layout system in CSS that allows you to create layouts using rows and columns.

It’s like drawing a table, but much more powerful and flexible.

You can divide a container into grid cells and place items exactly where you want.
When to Use Grid over Flexbox

✅ Use Flexbox when:

You need to align items in one direction (row or column).

Example: Navbars, toolbars, aligning buttons.

✅ Use Grid when:

You need a two-dimensional layout (rows + columns).

Example: Full webpage layout, image galleries, dashboards.

Question 2: Describe the grid-template-columns, grid-template-rows, and grid-gap
properties. Provide examples of how to use them.
ANS:
1. grid-template-columns

👉 Defines how many columns the grid will have and their sizes.

Values can be:

Fixed units (px, em)

Flexible units (fr → fraction of available space)

Percentages (%)

auto → adjusts to content
. grid-template-rows

👉 Defines how many rows the grid will have and their sizes.
3. grid-gap (or gap in modern CSS)

👉 Defines the spacing (gutters) between rows and columns.

                             Responsive Web Design with Media Queries

Theory Assignment

Question 1: What are media queries in CSS, and why are they important for responsive
design?
ANS:
Media Queries in CSS

Definition: Media queries are CSS rules that apply styles based on the device’s characteristics such as screen size, resolution, or orientation.

They allow a website to adapt its layout depending on whether it’s viewed on a phone, tablet, laptop, or large screen

Why Media Queries Are Important for Responsive Design

Mobile-Friendly Websites → Layout automatically adjusts for small screens.

Better User Experience (UX) → Content is readable and well-organized across all devices.

Cross-Device Compatibility → Works on phones, tablets, desktops, and TVs.

Efficient Layout Control → Different designs for portrait vs landscape orientation.

Question 2: Write a basic media query that adjusts the font size of a webpage for screens
smaller than 600px
ANS:
/* Default font size for large screens */
body {
  font-size: 18px;
}

/* Media query for screens smaller than 600px */
@media (max-width: 600px) {
  body {
    font-size: 14px; /* smaller font for small screens */
  }
}
✅ Explanation:

@media (max-width: 600px) → This means the CSS inside will apply only if the screen width is 600px or less.

On big screens → font size = 18px.

On small screens (mobile) → font size = 14px.


                                           Typography and Web Fonts

Theory Assignment

Question 1: Explain the difference between web-safe fonts and custom web fonts. Whymight
you use a web-safe font over a custom font?
ANS:
1. Web-Safe Fonts

Definition: Web-safe fonts are the default fonts pre-installed on almost all devices and operating systems.

Examples: Arial, Times New Roman, Georgia, Verdana, Courier New, Tahoma.

Since they are already installed, browsers don’t need to download them → they load fast and look the same across most devices.

✅ Advantages:

No extra loading time.

High compatibility (work across devices).

Good for performance.

❌ Disadvantages:

Limited design choices.

Can look too common or less stylish.
2. Custom Web Fonts

Definition: Custom fonts are fonts that are not installed by default on devices, but are loaded from external sources (like Google Fonts, Adobe Fonts, or a self-hosted file).

Example: Roboto, Open Sans, Lobster, Montserrat.

✅ Advantages:

Wide variety → more creative and unique designs.

Consistent branding (match a company’s identity).

❌ Disadvantages:

Require downloading (slower performance).

Might cause "flash of unstyled text" (FOUT) while loading.

If external font source fails, fallback is needed.

Why Use Web-Safe Fonts Over Custom Fonts?

You might choose web-safe fonts when:

Performance is critical (fast load times, especially on slow networks).

Compatibility is needed across very old devices/browsers.

Minimalist design → you don’t need fancy fonts.

You want to avoid dependency on external font providers.

































































































